1. Relativity and reference frames in classical mechanics
1.1 The origins of Galilean relativity
The term “reference frame” was coined in the 19th century, but it has a long prehistory, beginning, perhaps, with the emergence of the Copernican theory. The significant point was not the replacement of the earth by the sun as the center of all motion in the universe, but the recognition of both the earth and the sun as merely possible points of view from which the motions of the celestial bodies may be described. This implied that the basic task of Ptolemaic astronomy—to represent the planetary motions by combinations of circular motions—could take any point to be fixed, without sacrificing predictive power. Therefore, as Copernicus suggested in the opening arguments of On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, the choice of any particular point required some justification on grounds other than mere successful astronomical prediction. The most persuasive grounds, seemingly, were physical: we don’t perceive the physical effects that we would expect the earth’s motion to produce. Copernicus himself noted, however, in reply, that we can indeed undergo motions that are physically imperceptible, as on a smoothly moving ship (1543, p.6). At least in some circumstances, we can easily treat our moving point of view as if it were at rest.

As the basic programme of Ptolemy and Copernicus gave way to that of early classical mechanics as developed by Galileo, this equivalence of points of view was made more precise and explicit. Galileo was unable to present a decisive argument for the motion of the earth around the sun. He demonstrated, however, that the Copernican view does not contradict our experience of a seemingly stable earth. He accomplished this through a principle that, in the precise form that it takes in Newtonian mechanics, has become known as the “principle of Galilean relativity”: mechanical experiments will have the same results in a system in uniform motion that they have in a system at rest. Arguments against the motion of the earth had typically appealed to experimental evidence—e.g., that a stone dropped from a tower falls to the base of the tower, instead of being left behind as the earth rotates during its fall. But Galileo argued persuasively that such experiments would happen just as they do whether the earth were moving or not, provided that the motion is sufficiently uniform. (See Figure 1.) Galileo’s account of this was not precisely the principle that we call “Galilean relativity”; he seems to have thought that a system in uniform circular motion, such as a frame at rest on the rotating earth, would be indistinguishable from a frame truly at rest. The principle was named in his honor because he had grasped the underlying idea of dynamical equivalence: he understood the composition of motion, and understood how individual motions of bodies within a system—such as the fall of a stone from a tower—are composed with the motion of the system as a whole. This principle of composition, combined with the idea that bodies maintain their uniform motion, formed the basis for the idea of dynamically indistinguishable frames of reference.

figure 1
Figure 1: Galileo’s Argument If the earth is rotating sufficiently uniformly, a stone dropped from the tower will fall straight to the base, just as a stone dropped from the mast of a uniformly moving ship will fall to the foot of the mast. In both cases the stone’s vertical motion will be smoothly composed with its horizontal motion. Hence a sufficiently uniform motion will be indistinguishable from rest.

1.2 Philosophical controversy over absolute and relative motion
Leibniz, later, articulated a more general “equipollence of hypotheses”: in any system of interacting bodies, any hypothesis that any particular body is at rest is equivalent to any other. Therefore neither Copernicus’ nor Ptolemy’s view can be true—though one may be judged simpler than the other—because both are merely possible hypothetical interpretations of the same relative motions. This principle clearly defines (what we would call) a set of reference frames. They differ in their arbitrary choices of a resting point or origin, but agree on the relative positions of bodies at any moment and their changing relative distances through time.

For Leibniz and many others, this general equivalence was a matter of philosophical principle, founded in the metaphysical conviction that space itself is nothing more than an abstraction from the geometrical relations among bodies. In some form or other it was a widely shared tenet of the 17th-century “mechanical philosophy”. Yet it was flatly incompatible with physics as Leibniz himself, and the other “mechanists,” actually conceived it. For the basic program of mechanical explanation depended essentially on the concept of a privileged state of motion, as expressed in the common assumption that was the forerunner of the “principle of inertia”: bodies maintain a state of rectilinear motion until acted upon by an external cause. Thus their fundamental conception of force, as the power of a body to change the state of another, likewise depended on this notion of a privileged state. This dependence was clearly exhibited in the vortex theory of planetary motion, which presupposed that any planet would move in a straight line unless impeded. Its actual orbit was therefore explained by the balance between the planet’s inherent centrifugal tendency (its tendency to follow the tangent to the orbit) and the pressure of the surrounding medium.

For this reason, the notion of a dispute between “relativists” or “relationists” and “absolutists” or “substantivalists”, in the 17th century, is a drastic oversimplification. Newton, in his controversial Scholium on space, time, and motion, was not merely asserting that motion is absolute in the face of the mechanists’ relativist view. He was arguing that a conception of absolute motion was already implicit in the views of his opponents—that it was implicit in their conception, which he largely shared, of physical cause and effect. The general equivalence of reference-frames was implicitly denied by a physics that characterized forces as powers to change the states of motion of bodies.

This development placed the subject of reference frames in a new theoretical context. Having set aside the reference frame of common sense—the frame in which the earth is at rest in the center, with the heavens revolving around it—the mechanical physics of this time naturally tied this subject with novel theoretical conceptions of motion, and its physical causes and effects. Copernicus argued for a heliocentric system, not from a physical theory of motion, but from the comparative simplicity and reasonableness that it introduced into astronomy; he worked within the established theory of the causes of celestial motions, namely, the revolutions of the heavenly spheres. After Copernicus, however—more precisely, after the model of revolving spheres was largely abandoned—determining the right frame of reference was connected with discovering the true physical causes of the planets’ motions. Philosophers such as Kepler, Descartes, Huygens, Leibniz, and Newton held vastly differing views of physical causation, motion. and the relativity of motion. They agreed, however, that the heliocentric picture was uniquely suited for giving a causal account of planetary motions, as the effects of physical actions originating in the sun. To Kepler and Descartes, for example, the rotation of the sun on its axis, in the same sense in which the planets revolved, identified it as the cause of those revolutions.

The link between the causal account of motion and the more general conceptual account of “true” motion was never obvious or straightforward. Descartes’s heliocentric causal account, in which the planets moved in vortices arising from the sun’s rotation, was disconnected from his abstract account of motion “according to the truth of the matter,” or “in the proper sense” (Descartes 1642, part II section XXV). Since there are innumerable objects to which one might refer the motion of any given body, the reference may appear to be a matter of arbitrary choice. The unambiguous reference for the motion of any body, he argued, is provided by the bodies immediately touching it. Newton, in response, argued that Descartes’s philosophical account of motion is flatly incompatible with his causal account. To Newton, it was incoherent to appeal to a causal account of motion when explaining the centrifugal tendency of a body in its orbit around the sun, while identifying its “proper” motion only by its relations to the bodies immediately contiguous to it (Newton 1684a, Stein 1967, Rynasiewicz 2014). Hence Newton’s argument that the only unambiguous standard of motion is a body’s change of position with respect to space itself. To space understood in this sense, as the universal frame of reference with respect to which the displacements of bodies constitute their true motions, Newton gave the name “absolute space” (1687b, p. 5ff).

Evidently Newton was aware that “absolute space” was not a reference frame in any practical sense. He emphasized that “the parts of space cannot be seen,” and that no observable bodies can be known to be at rest. Hence there is no way to determine motion with respect to space by direct observation; it must be known by its “properties, causes, and effects” (1687b, p. 7–8). The question arises, then, what properties, causes, or effects indicate a body’s change of position in absolute space? It is conceivable, for example, that there might be some physical correlate for velocity, in the sense that a body might have some observable physical state that depends on its velocity. It follows, in that case, that a body would be in a distinct physical state when it is at rest in space. If a body could be known to be in that state, therefore, it would (in principle) provide a physical marker for a truly resting frame of reference. On Leibniz’s conception of force, for instance, a given force is required to generate or to maintain a given velocity. For objects “passively” resist motion, but maintain their states of motion only by “active” force—so that, on dynamical grounds, “every body truly does have a certain amount of motion, or, if you will, force” (Leibniz 1694, p. 184; see also 1716, p. 404). It would follow from this that there must be, in principle, a distinguished frame of reference in which the velocities of bodies correspond to their true velocities, i.e. to the amounts of moving force that they truly possess. It would also follow that, with respect to any frame that is in motion relative to this one, bodies will not have their true velocities. In short, such a conception of force, if it could be applied physically, would give a precise physical application of Newton’s conception of absolute space, by providing a physical correlate for change of absolute place.

1.3 Galilean relativity in Newtonian physics
The difficulty with Newton’s view of absolute space comes, not from the epistemological arguments of relationalism, but from Newton’s own conception of force. If force is defined and measured solely by the power to accelerate a body, then obviously the effects of forces—in short, the causal interactions within a system of bodies—will be independent of the velocity of the system in which they are measured. So the existence of a set of equivalent “inertial frames” is imposed from the start by Newton’s laws. Suppose that we determine for the bodies in a given frame of reference—say, the rest frame of the fixed stars—that all observable accelerations are proportional to forces impressed by bodies within the system, by equal and opposite actions and reactions among those bodies. Then we know that these physical interactions will be the same in any frame of reference that is in uniform rectilinear motion relative to the first one. Therefore no Newtonian experiment will be able to determine the velocity of a body, or system of bodies, relative to absolute space. In other words, there is no way to distinguish absolute space itself from any frame of reference that is in uniform motion relative to it. Newton thought that a coherent account of force and motion requires a background space consisting of “places” that “from infinity to infinity maintain given positions with respect to one another” (1687b, p. 8–9). But the laws of motion enable us to determine an infinity of such spaces, all in uniform rectilinear motion relative to each other. The laws furnish no way of singling out any one as “immovable space.”

Oddly enough, no one in the 17th century, or even before the late 19th century, expressed this equivalence of reference-frames any more clearly than Newton himself. However, the credit for articulating this equivalence precisely for the first time, belongs to Christiaan Huygens, who introduced it as one of the Hypotheses of his first work on the rules of impact (1656). “Hypothesis I” was the first clear statement of the principle of inertia: “Any body, once in motion, if nothing opposes it, continues to move always with the same velocity and along the same straight line” (1656, pp. 30–31). The first precise statement of the relativity principle followed as Hypothesis III:

The motion of bodies, and their speeds equal or unequal, are to be understood respectively, in relation to other bodies which are considered as at rest, even though perhaps both the former and the latter are subject to another motion that is common to them. In consequence, when two bodies collide with one another, even if both together undergo another equable motion, they will move each other no differently, with respect to a body that is carried by the same common motion, than if this extraneous motion were absent from all of them. (1656, p. 32).
Huygens illustrated this principle by the example of an impact that takes place on a uniformly moving boat, asserting its equivalence to the same impact taking place at rest. Thus he made precise the argument of Galileo, in light of his more precise understanding of the principle of inertia and the dynamical difference between inertial and circular motion.

Newton’s first statement of the same principle appears in one of the series of papers that culminated in the Principia, “De motu sphæricorum corporum in fluidis” (1684b). Like Huygens, Newton presents the relativity principle as a fundamental principle, “Law 3”:

The motions of bodies included in a given space are the same among themselves whether that space is at rest or moves uniformly in a straight line without circular motion. (1684b, p. 40r)
Newton’s first statement of the Galilean relativity principle evidently recapitulates Huygens’ version, which was probably known to Newton. The same may be said of “Law 4” in this manuscript, the principle of conservation of the center of gravity:

By the mutual actions between bodies their common centre of gravity does not change its state of motion or rest. (ibid., p. 40r)
But, uniquely, Newton immediately went on to consider the deeper theoretical significance of these principles: they radically reconceptualize the problem of “true motion” in the planetary system. First, they implied that the entire system must be seen as included in a space that may, itself, be either at rest or in uniform motion. Second, they implied that the only truly fixed point in such a system is the center of gravity of the relevant bodies. This, too, may therefore be in uniform motion or at rest:

Moreover the whole space of the planetary heavens either rests (as is commonly believed) or moves uniformly in a straight line, and hence the communal centre of gravity of the planets (by Law 4) either rests or moves along with it. In both cases (by Law 3) the relative motions of the planets are the same, and their common centre of gravity rests in relation to the whole space, and so can certainly be taken for the still centre of the whole planetary system. (ibid., p. 47r)
Newton now realized, in short, that the dispute between the heliocentric and geocentric views of the universe had been mistakenly framed. The proper question about “the system of the world” was not “which body is at rest in the center?” but “where is the center of gravity of the system, and which body is closest to it?” For in a system of orbiting bodies, only their common center of gravity will be unaccelerated, and by “Law 3”, the motions of the bodies in the system will be the same, whether its center of gravity is at rest or in uniform rectilinear motion. By explicitly asserting the dynamical equivalence of “whole spaces” that may moving uniformly or at rest, Newton made it clear that the solution to the problem of “the system of the world” is the same with respect to any such moving space as it is with respect to immobile space. Thus he came as close to articulating the concept of the inertial frame as anyone before the late 19th century.

In the successive drafts of his Principia, Newton gradually clarified its conceptual structure, and in particular the frame-independent character of its concepts of motion, force, and interaction. He arrived at the new axiomatic structure whose only laws are the familiar “Newton’s Laws of Motion”; the principle of the conservation of the center of gravity, and the relativity principle, were no longer presupposed, but derived from the Laws as Corollaries IV and V:

Corollary IV: The common center of gravity of bodies does not change its state, whether of motion or rest, by the actions of those bodies among themselves; therefore the common centre of gravity of all bodies (external impediments excluded) rests or moves uniformly in a straight line (1687b, p. 17).
Corollary V: When bodies are enclosed in a given space, their motions among themselves are the same whether the space is at rest, or whether it is moving uniformly straight forward without circular motion (1687b, p. 19).
These principles illuminate the relationship between the theory of absolute space, as articulated in Newton’s Scholium to the Definitions, and the overarching scientific problem of the Principia. According to Newton, “the aim for which I composed” the book was to show “how to gather the true motions from their causes, effects, and apparent differences, and conversely, from the motions, true or apparent, to gather their causes and effects” (1687b, p. 11); the more specific aim of Book III was “to exhibit the constitution of the system of the world” (1687b, p. 401).

On the one hand, Corollary V, like “Law 3” in De Motu, precisely restricts what Newton’s procedure can determine about the structure of the system of the world. It cannot determine anything about the velocity of the system as a whole; it can only determine the position of the center of gravity of the bodies that comprise it, and the configuration of those bodies with respect to that center. In this sense it can, in principle, decide between a Keplerian and a Tychonic interpretation of the motions of these bodies. The system is indeed approximately Keplerian: the sun has by far the greatest mass and is therefore little disturbed from the center of gravity by its interactions with the planets. The sun therefore remains very close to the common focus of the nearly Keplerian ellipses in which the planets orbit the sun. But by Corollary V, the actions of the bodies among themselves would not reveal whether their center was moving uniformly or at rest. On the other hand, Newton recognized that motion with respect to absolute space is unknowable. This restriction, therefore, meant that the solution to the system of the world is secure in spite of our ignorance. The nearly-Keplerian structure of the system is known completely independently of the system’s state of motion in absolute space.

The Galilean relativity principle thus contained, in Newton’s conception, a broader insight: that different states of uniform motion, or different uniformly-moving frames of reference, determine only different points of view on the same physically objective quantities, namely force, mass, and acceleration. We can see this insight expressed more explicitly in the evolution of Newton’s concept of inertia. The term had been introduced by Kepler, and played a central role in his physical conception of planetary motion. Rejecting the Aristotelian idea that the planets are carried by rotating crystalline spheres, Kepler held that the planets have a natural tendency to rest in space—what he called their natural inertia—and argued that they must be moved by active powers that overcome their natural inertia. Newton, well before working on Principia, had based his conception of inertia on the idea of Galileo and Huygens, that bodies tend to persist in uniform motion: Inertia, on this new conception, was a resistance to change in motion. Even so, Newton’s early understanding of inertia was essentially pre-relativistic, because it implied a conceptual distinction between a body’s power to resist external forces, and the power of a moving body to change the motion of another. The manuscript De gravitatione et aequipondio fluidorum (1684a), for example, was evidently written before Newton fully recognized the importance of the relativity principle; here Newton’s Definitions distinguish “conatus,” “impetus,” and “inertia” as conceptually separate properties:

Definition 6: Conatus (endeavor) is impeded force, or force in so far as it is resisted.
Definition 7: Impetus is force in so far as it is impressed on another.
Definition 8: Inertia is the internal force of a body, so that its state may not be easily changed by an external force (1684a).
Leibniz (among others), as we saw, made a corresponding distinction: moving force, the power of a body to change the motion of another, was determined by velocity. Leibniz therefore distinguished this force as an active power, fundamentally different from the passive power of a resting body to resist any change of position. Newton, in contrast, as he developed the Principia, and recognized the existence of a class of indistinguishable relative spaces, gradually came to understand the “force of inertia” as what we would call a Galilei-invariant quantity. Impetus and resistance were therefore recognized as appearances of that invariant quantity in different frames of reference:

A body truly exerts this force only in a change of its state brought about by another force impressed upon it, and the exercise of this force is, under different aspects, both resistance and impetus: resistance in so far as the body, to maintain its state, opposes the impressed force; impetus insofar as the same body, yielding only with difficulty to the force of a resisting obstacle, strives to change the state of that obstacle. Resistance is commonly attributed to resting bodies and impetus to moving bodies; but motion and rest, as commonly understood, are only relatively distinguished from each other; and bodies commonly seen as resting are not always truly at rest (1687b, p. 2).
There are two noteworthy points about this explication of inertia. First, it shows that Newton recognized properties that were commonly regarded as distinct (e.g. in the Leibnizian distinction between passive and active) as merely frame-dependent representations of the same fundamental property. That is, they represent the same invariant quantity seen from different points of view. The principle that a body exerts this force “only in a change of its state” decisively separates Newton’s new view from the older notion of a specific power that is required to maintain a body in motion. This change has been noted by modern commentators (see Herivel 1965, p. 26; see also DiSalle 2013, p. 453; Disalle 2017, in Other Internet Resources). But it was already noted in Newton’s own time by George Berkeley, who emphasized the contrast between Newton’s conception and that of Leibniz:

Leibniz confuses impetus with motion. According to Newton, impetus is in truth the same as the force of inertia… (Berkeley 1721 [1992], p. 79)
…it is established by experience that it is a primary law of nature that a body persists “in a state of motion or of rest as long as nothing happens from elsewhere to change that state,” and therefore it is inferred that the force of inertia is under different aspects either resistance or impetus, in this sense a body can indeed be said to be by nature indifferent to motion and rest. (Berkeley, 1721 [1992], p. 96)
Berkeley thus made clear that the older understanding of inertia, unlike that expressed in the Principia, did not respect the principle of relativity. Second, Newton’s explication implicitly invokes all three laws of motion (cf. Stein 2002). Newton’s first law alone came to be identified as “the principle of inertia.” Newton himself, however, understood that inertia has three inseparable aspects: the tendency to persist in motion, the resistance to change in motion, and the power to react against an impressed force. All are essential to the explication of inertial mass as a measurable theoretical quantity. To many later commentators, Newton’s use of the phrase “force of inertia” suggested a conceptual confusion. On the contrary, it was Newton’s way of drawing attention to the precise role of inertial mass as an invariant quantity in physical interactions, underlying the various ways in which its manifestations had been previously conceived.

1.4 The lingering problem of absolute space
Newton understood the Galilean principle of relativity with a degree of depth and clarity that eluded most of his “relativist” contemporaries and critics. It may seem bizarre, therefore, that the notion of inertial frame did not emerge until more than a century and a half after his death. He had identified a distinguished class of dynamically equivalent “relative spaces,” in any of which true forces and masses, accelerations and rotations, would have the same objectively measured values. Yet these spaces, though dynamically equivalent and empirically indistinguishable, were yet not equivalent in principle. Evidently, Newton conceived them as moving with various velocities in absolute space, though those velocities could not be known. Why should not he, or someone, have recognized the equivalence of these spaces, and the dispensability of a distinguished resting space—“absolute” space—immediately?

This is not the place for an adequate answer to this question, if indeed one is possible. For much of the 20th century, the accepted answer was that of Ernst Mach: Newton lived in an age “deficient in epistemological critique.” He was therefore unable to draw the conclusion that these dynamically indistinguishable spaces must be equivalent in every meaningful sense, so that no one of them deserves even in principle to be designated as “absolute space.” Yet even those whom the 20th century credited with more sophisticated epistemological views, such as Leibniz, evidently had difficulties understanding force and inertia in a Galilei-invariant way, despite a philosophical commitment to relativity. We may plausibly suppose that it was difficult to abandon the intuitive association of force or motion with velocity in space. It must also have been difficult, in the mathematical context of Newton’s time, to conceive of an equivalence-class structure as the fundamental spatio-temporal framework. It required a level of abstraction that became possible only with the extraordinary development of mathematics, especially of a more abstract view of geometry, that took place in the 19th century. Newton’s arguments established, for the assumptions of classical dynamics, the need for a dynamical space-time structure beyond the kinematical structure required to represent changes of relative position over time. But absolute space, with its superfluous elements, was the only such structure imagined for the next two centuries. It was accepted as the only realistic alternative to theories with no dynamical structure at all. There was as yet no notion of a structure that expressed all and only what was required by the dynamical laws. Euler, for example, in a penetrating critique of Leibnizian relationalism (1748), argued that the laws of motion require a notion of sameness of direction in space, and of uniform motion with respect to time. The truth of the laws of motion—which, for Euler, were more securely established than any principle of metaphysics—could not, therefore, be reconciled with any account of space and time as merely ideal. But he did not see the possibility of separating true acceleration and rotation from true velocity with respect to absolute space.

In the 17th century, only Huygens came close to expressing such a view; he held that not velocity, but velocity-difference, was the fundamental dynamical quantity. He therefore understood, for example, that the “absoluteness” of rotation had nothing to do with velocity relative to absolute space. Instead, it arose from the difference of velocity among different parts of a rotating body. If a disk is translated through space without rotation, then its parts move in parallel lines, but if it is rotating, then they move in different directions, even though they are at rest relative to one another on account of the bonds holding them together. The differences, evidently, would be the same irrespective of the velocity of the body as a whole in absolute space. Unfortunately, Huygens expressed this view only in manuscripts that remained unpublished for two centuries. (Cf. Stein, 1977, pp. 9–10 and Appendix III.) Huygens also reflected on the possibility of replacing absolute space with (what we would call) empirical frames of reference, again in unpublished notes that have only been brought to light in recent work by Stan (2016). But the complete concept of the inertial frame emerged only in the late 19th century, when it did not seem to be of any great immediate importance (see below). Indeed, even after the concept of inertial frame had been widely discussed, the notion persisted that true rotation could only be understood as rotation with respect to absolute space. Poincaré, for example, convinced of the essential “relativity of space” as well as the relativity of motion, considered the concept of absolute space to be something of a philosophical embarrassment. But it was not clear to him how the dynamical phenomena of rotation could be understood without it (cf. DiSalle 2014). So the failure of Newton and Huygens to formulate the concept of inertial frame, two centuries earlier, seems less remarkable than the progress that each of them made in understanding the relativity of motion. As we will see, articulating this concept involved synthesizing (in effect) insights of Newton, Huygens, and Euler.

1.5 19th-century analyses of the law of inertia
The development of this concept began with a renewed critical analysis of the notion of absolute space, for reasons not anticipated by Newton’s contemporary critics. Its starting point was a critical question about the law of inertia: relative to what is the motion of a free particle uniform and rectilinear? If the answer is “absolute space,” then the law would appear to be something other than an empirical claim, for no one can observe the trajectory of a particle relative to absolute space. Two quite different answers to the question were offered in 1870, in the form of revised statements of the law of inertia. Carl Neumann proposed that when we state the law, we must suppose that there is a body somewhere in the universe—the “body Alpha”—with respect to which the motion of a free particle is rectilinear, and that there is a time-scale somewhere relative to which it is uniform (Neumann 1870). Ernst Mach (1883) claimed that the law of inertia, and Newton’s laws generally, implicitly appeal to the fixed stars as a spatial reference-frame, and to the rotation of the earth as a time-scale. At any rate, he maintained, such is the basis for any genuine empirical content that the laws can claim. The notion of absolute space, it followed, was only an unwarranted abstraction from the practice of measuring motions relative to the fixed stars.

Mach’s proposal had the advantage of a clear empirical motivation; Neumann’s “body Alpha” seemed no less mysterious than absolute space, and almost sounds comical to the modern reader. But Neumann’s discussion of a time-scale was somewhat more fruitful, and employed the principle that Euler had already expressed (1748): the law of inertia defines a time-scale, by which equal intervals of time are those in which a free particle travels equal distances. He also noted, however, that this definition is quite arbitrary. For, in the absence of a prior definition of equal times, any motion whatever can be stipulated to be uniform. It is no help to appeal to the requirement of freedom from external forces, since the free particles presumably are known to us only by their uniform motion. We have a genuine empirical claim only when we state of at least two free particles that their motions are mutually proportional. Equal intervals of time can then be defined as those in which two free particles travel mutually proportional distances.